Client side scripts guide update (#12091)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/client-side-scripts.mdx

---
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro'

> You can add interactivity to your Astro components without [using a UI framework](/en/guides/framework-components/) like React, Svelte, Vue, etc. using `<script>` tags. This allows you to send JavaScript to run in the browser and add functionality to your components.
> 
> By default, Astro processes and bundles `<script>` tags with TypeScript support, npm module imports, and automatic optimization.

Reviewer: A small variation of @sarah11918’s proposal, although I also like that version quite a lot. 
```suggestion
You can send JavaScript to the browser and add functionality to your Astro components using `<script>` tags in the component template.

This allows you to create interactivity, handle events, or update content dynamically without integrating a [UI framework](/en/guides/framework-components/) like React, Svelte, or Vue, and without sending unnecessary framework JavaScript to the client.
```

---
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro'

> You can send JavaScript to the browser and add functionality to your Astro components using `<script>` tags in the component template.

Author: @bjohansebas @sarah11918 I modified y'alls suggestions for this line to be more terse, it's a bit of my own personal taste though so please weigh in again if you don't mind.

> This allows you to create interactivity, handle events, or update content dynamically without integrating a [UI framework](/en/guides/framework-components/).

Author: @bjohansebas @sarah11918 I modified y'alls suggestions for this line to be more concise, it's a bit of my own personal taste though so please weigh in again if you don't mind.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scripts add interactivity to your site, such as handling events or updating content dynamically, without the need for a [UI framework](/en/guides/framework-components/) like React, Svelte, or Vue. This avoids the overhead of shipping framework JavaScript and doesn't require you to know any additional framework to create a full-featured web site or application.
```
Just explaining the reason behind my edits, and my suggestion is just a way to get there, but can still be iterated upon!

- "this" is too vague to start here. (What's the antecedent: "script tags" (which is plural)? "JavaScript"? "the component template"?) For a basic page introduction, we have to be more explicit, I think, so we can deliberately lead the reader through a chain of thought with no doubt of where they're going. The introduction is not the place to skimp for the sake of brevity, since it has really important duties re: introducing the topic, grounding people in context, setting them up for what content is on this page, helping them figure out if they're in the right place... 

- we've never said "integrating a framework" and that usage feels off to me

- that list is written as an exhaustive list, and I'm not sure we mean to imply those are exactly and the only things possible, so I don't like framing it as "here are the 3 things you can do" (which again, in an introduction, is exactly how people will read this. If you were studying a new topic and taking notes, I guarantee that's how you'd interpret it.)

- we've lost one of the "benefits" (and in fact a question people often ask about!) if we don't mention not shipping framework JS to the browser.

- I also snuck in something I *wanted* to add in my first attempt, which is that you don't need to know anything but plain vanilla JS! Sorry, flagrantly bringing it up for consideration in the face of your attempt at brevity! :joy: But, I do want help saying this as concisely as possible!

## Client-Side Scripts

Scripts can be used to add event listeners, send analytics data, play animations, and everything else JavaScript can do on the web.

> By default, [Astro processes and bundles `<script>` tags](#script-processing), adding support for importing npm modules, writing TypeScript, and more.

Author: This is great, I will commit it when back to computer, only thought is instead of saying can provide extra.. we should say does provide and then specify unless x

> By default, [Astro processes and bundles `<script>` tags](#script-processing), adding support for importing npm modules, writing TypeScript, and more.

Author: Also I note that I'm trying to avoid saying supports typescript so that we can make it clear that the scripts are always treated as typescript

> By default, [Astro processes and bundles `<script>` tags](#script-processing), adding support for importing npm modules, writing TypeScript, and more.

Reviewer 2: > we should say does provide and then specify unless x

This was my thinking with saying that it *can* provide processing, as a bonus, and then linking to "when will it not be processed." This lets us not clutter the basic definition of scripts with a bunch of exclusions here.

And, it doesn't *always* provide processing "by default" because there are exclusions, some of which you might not even know are happening (e.g. script size). So I think it's better not to say "by default" at all, but frame it as, "It's like HTML, but with the ability to be supercharged!" similar to the way we refer to Astro's templating language as a superset of HTML.

> make it clear that the scripts are always treated as typescript

a) How *important* is it for people to know this vs know they are allowed to write TypeScript? Who is that difference of nuance helping? If someone wouldn't write TS themselves, then is there any way not knowing this can hurt them? (And, we have to assure them that it's OK if they "only write JS") If they do know they can write TS, then won't they assume that their script is in fact treated like TS? I'm not opposed to adding it, but each bit of info we try to cram in makes things just that little bit clunkier (and less concise!) so it's important to consider the advantage of saying "everything that is true."

b) If it's crucial that people understand this, one thought is to include it in the definition (note, as attempting versions of this, I felt the clunkiness sinking in, which is why I stopped and wrote part a above, because it's a trade off):

e.g. squishing it upfront:
```
The Astro `<script>` element is similar to the standard HTML script tag, but is [treated as TypeScript](/en/guides/typescript/) and can provide extra [processing](#script-processing) that bundles multiple `<script>` tags, allows you to import npm packages, and more.
```

e.g. with another sentence
```
The Astro `<script>` element is similar to the standard HTML script tag, but can provide extra [processing](#script-processing) for your that bundles multiple `<script>` tags, allows you to import npm packages, and more. Like the code in your [Astro component script](/en/basics/astro-components/), [all JavaScript is treated as TypeScript](/en/guides/typescript/).
```

---
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro'

You can add interactivity to your Astro components without [using a UI framework](/en/guides/framework-components/) like React, Svelte, Vue, etc. using standard HTML `<script>` tags. This allows you to send JavaScript to run in the browser and add functionality to your Astro components.
You can add interactivity to your Astro components without [using a UI framework](/en/guides/framework-components/) like React, Svelte, Vue, etc. using `<script>` tags. This allows you to send JavaScript to run in the browser and add functionality to your components.

> ## Client-Side Scripts

Author: Added it back in

## Script processing

By default, `<script>` tags with no additional attributes other than `src` are processed by Astro in the following ways:

- **TypeScript by default:** All scripts are processed as TypeScript.
- **Import bundling:** Import local files or npm modules, which will be bundled together.
- **Module injection:** The processed script is injected with [`type="module"`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules).
- **Script deduplication:** If your component is used multiple times on a page, the script will only be included once.
- **Automatic inlining:** If the script is small enough, Astro will inline it directly into the HTML to reduce the number of requests. See [Externalization](#externalization) for more details.

> ### Opting out of processing

Author: I went with "Unprocessed scripts" from your other comment

</script>
```

## Script processing

By default, `<script>` tags with no additional attributes other than `src` are processed by Astro in the following ways:

- **TypeScript by default:** All scripts are processed as TypeScript.
- **Import bundling:** Import local files or npm modules, which will be bundled together.
- **Module injection:** The processed script is injected with [`type="module"`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules).
- **Script deduplication:** If your component is used multiple times on a page, the script will only be included once.
- **Automatic inlining:** If the script is small enough, Astro will inline it directly into the HTML to reduce the number of requests. See [Externalization](#externalization) for more details.

> ### Unprocessed scripts

Reviewer 2: Going to keep as is, and fix the other links accordingly

> Astro will not process your script tags if the `<script>` tag has any attribute other than `src`. Add the [`is:inline`](/en/reference/directives-reference/#isinline) directive to intentionally opt out of processing for a script.

Author: the thing is that scripts are now inlined and processed, unless they are above 4kb in size total. So inlined isn't the best term to differentiate processed vs non processed scripts

> Astro will not process your script tags if the `<script>` tag has any attribute other than `src`. Add the [`is:inline`](/en/reference/directives-reference/#isinline) directive to intentionally opt out of processing for a script.

Reviewer 2: OK, then back to the drawing board here! :sweat_smile: 

I'm still not *entirely* sold on "unprocessed scripts" (though I think that's the closest we've come), nor "opting out" as it was originally since I think this section also helps explain why scripts are unintentionally not processed.

Is there a more user-relevant term than "processed" to describe a script? What are they experiencing about those scripts? "Unbundled" (though, that might not cover it)? "Unoptimized"?

In this situation, we're using "processed" to mean scripts that do in fact still execute, just are not handled by Astro. So "unprocessed" almost feels too much like hinting at they might not actually work? We might "skip over them?"

I guess we'll keep thinking here!

> Astro will not process your script tags if the `<script>` tag has any attribute other than `src`. Add the [`is:inline`](/en/reference/directives-reference/#isinline) directive to intentionally opt out of processing for a script.

Author: Ya the distinction we are trying to make is whether Astro does anything to them. Normally html written in .astro files doesn't get changed, so we want to highlight that for scripts it does get changed, except in these distinct circumstances

> Astro will not process your script tags if the `<script>` tag has any attribute other than `src`. Add the [`is:inline`](/en/reference/directives-reference/#isinline) directive to intentionally opt out of processing for a script.

Author: I think we want to keep the terminology consistent for the positive and the negative so if we say script processing we said unprocessed scripts 

optimizing is good, bundled only covers part of it though 

im at a loss though for ideas sadly I will keep thinking though

#### Import local scripts

> **When to use this:** When your script lives inside of `src/`.

Author: Haha not sure why I did that, reverted it.

</script>
```

> ### Externalization

Reviewer 2: As we discussed on Talking and Doc'ing, maybe this whole section can be replaced with some kind of link to Vite, placed somewhere appropriate like where we talk about script processing?

> Astro's script processing and minification is handled by Vite. While normally not required, additional Vite configuration (e.g. [`vite.build.assetsInlineLimit`](https://vite.dev/config/build-options.html#build-assetsinlinelimit)) can be set in your Astro config file.

Author: there's no good link to replace it, I think for now we cut it out entirely and maybe do a guide or reference page

When Astro builds your site for production deployment, it processes and minifies your scripts. When scripts are above 4kB in size, they will be made into external files using `<script type="module" src="...">`, while smaller ones are inlined directly as `<script type="module">` with the JavaScript code embedded. This approach provides a balance between the number of additional requests and the volume of JavaScript that can be cached between pages.

You can configure the size at which scripts will be linked externally (in bytes) using the `assetsInlineLimit` vite build option. Note that this option affects stylesheet and image inlining as well.

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  vite: {
    build: {
      assetsInlineLimit: 1024,
    }
  }
});
```

> #### External script behavior

Reviewer 2: Again wondering about the section heading here. It says "external scripts" which feels very broad, but then goes on to talk about "external scripts with type module" -- is that the only kind of external scripts? 

If the only content here is about being handled differently by the client router, maybe a section heading *about* scripts and the client router (even if it just mostly warns and links to view transitions) is a helpful anchor link to have, and descriptive of the content below?

Author: for now I think we cut this and the whole externalization section as it wasn't there before so we aren't making things worse, and we can make it into a guide in future

<script is:inline src="https://my-analytics.com/script.js"></script>
```

### Externalization

When Astro builds your site for production deployment, it processes and minifies your scripts. When scripts are above 4kB in size, they will be made into external files using `<script type="module" src="...">`, while smaller ones are inlined directly as `<script type="module">` with the JavaScript code embedded. This approach provides a balance between the number of additional requests and the volume of JavaScript that can be cached between pages.

> You can configure the size at which scripts will be linked externally (in bytes) using the `assetsInlineLimit` vite build option. Note that this option affects stylesheet and image inlining as well.

Author: > Note that this option affects stylesheet and image inlining as well

This wording comes from https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/styling/#bundle-control, I wasn't sure about duplicating it, and I also wasn't sure/aware that astro actually inlined images.

Author: #2 seems like the right call to me

Author: I dont think for now it needs to change, and I have since confirmed that astro does inline images when they are imported and used in .css files that are imported in .astro components, which is does automatically by vite and thus why it is affected here. 

In general some sort of centralized way to explain this and how assets work within astro in general would be cool but maybe not needed in this PR
